# ML-multiomics

This repository contains the code and data used for the paper *Multiomics machine learning identifies sleep and inflammation molecular pathways in prodromal Alzheimer’s Disease* (https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.02.23286674). In this paper, we wanted to identify early disease pathways involved in the conversion to AD. To this end, we analyzed both proteomics and metabolomics data from participants in the European Medical Information Framework for Alzheimer's Disease (EMIF-AD) Multimodal Biomarker Discovery Study using four machine learning algorithms. Our study aims to address two main research questions: 1) which proteins and metabolites are most relevant in differentiating between controls, MCI, and AD? and 2) which proteins and metabolites are most relevant in differentiating between MCI stable and MCI converter? Our results indicate the presence of pathways related to inflammation, sleep, neural proteins, and protein degradation. Further exploring the inflammation connection, we studied microglia in vitro and discovered that they secreted an endocannabinoid called oleamide. For more information, please see https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.02.23286674.

In this repository, you can find the scripts used for data preprocessing, machine learning models training and the code used to create the figures of the manuscript. The code was created by *Talel Naccache* and *Alicia Gómez-Pascual*. Regarding the data, the generated metabolomic and proteomic data in EMIF is considered sensitive patient data and can therefore not be publicly available in compliance with the European privacy regulations governed by GDPR and according to limitations included in the informed consents signed by the study participants. Data are available upon request by contacting the EMIF-AD data hub steering committee (for more information, please see data availability statement). We report a small summary of the proteomic and metabolomic data that includes the average level of each protein and metabolite per group of participants (NL, normal elderly; sMCI, MCI stable; cMCI, MCI converters; AD, Alzheimer's disease).



